  I absolutley love GitHub! This class really thoroughly introduced usage and familiarity with Github as well as the underlying Git commands. I feel that I am much better equipped to work with tools saved on GitHub by other developers and certainly plan on utilizing it myself for storage and code/file sharing going forward.
  
  My project accomplished some major goals, including initiating a research project I have had to put off for some time into a head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) single-cell RNA-seq (scRNAseq) dataset. This dataset was just a bit too large and unwieldy for me to work with last semester, so I set out to develop a tool that would make analysis a bit easier and faster. Specifically, I set out with the hypothesis that I would find some sort of correlation/covariance structure in my dataset. Thus, I attempted to combine programmatic optimization with biostatistical analysis of genomic data.
  
    I ultimately deviated quite a bit from the proposal. Firstly, I ran into quite a few problems with some of the packages I attempted to utilize, especially h5py and pymc3, which I was not able to resolve before the deadline. Namely, I had difficulty loading my data into "chunks" using h5py. I also had difficulty getting pymc3 to run on my data, despite getting it working on a simulated dataset with Professor Eaton's help. I did not end up utilizing dask or scikit-allel, though these might end up being implemented at a later date.
    
    Probably the biggest change from my propsed idea was to shift from an "unsupervised" approach that can simply detect any covariance structure in all ~20,000 gene rows x ~6,000 single-cell columns of my dataset. However, this was not feasible for usage on a local computer. Thus, I decided late in the game to pivot toward a more "supervised" approach by selecting a group of 10 genes for biological reasons explained in my final notebook file. This entailed some significant changes to my code, but will make the problem much more manageable. I took these 10 genes and randomly selected sample columns from my gene expression matrix to ultimately get a 10 x 454 data matrix; nevertheless, the error returned by pymc3 when fed this matrix cited lack of memory. Thus, The largest problem I experienced in every stage of my project was finding ways to deal with large datasets.
    
    I feel that I have learned a ton about python and data analysis generally. I certainly don't feel as though I'm a master, but I definitely have a solid foundation from which to build (ironically, this "building" will probably involve tinkering around with and breaking example code). I still have a ton to learn; on some level, I still need to attain a level of basic familiarity with python to the point that it becomes second-nature (kind of like how I feel to a much greater degree with R). More usage of tools like h5py and pymc3 along with more basic ones like numpy and pandas will be good ways to accomplish this going forward. I certainly plan on seeing this project to completion in the summer and have even written my code with the idea of turning this into a more programmatic API or even CLI in mind, although my code is not currently organized in the form of python classes.  
    
