Proposal for EEEB Project: tool for gene coexpression analysis

I am proposing to create a tool that will facilitate gene coexpression analysis on single-cell RNA seq data. This is a very new technology with increasingly broad application. Data is being generated at breakneck speed. The bottleneck of the research pipeline is increasingly shifting toward data analysis. With single-cell data in particular, there is a lack of consensus on best practices for analysis and lack of clarity on how to apply existing algorithms and analysis tools. Thus, it would be beneficial to work on a clear, easy to utilize tool for the analysis of single cell data toward the goal of coespression analysis, which is one major goal of RNA-seq. Specifically, the tool I intend to work on should be able to run locally by iteratively slicing large datasets and applying analytical methods. 

The data I intend to analyze is a single-cell RNA seq dataset derived from head and neck cancer tumors. The data consists of 5,902 single cells from 18 patients with oral cavity tumors. Tumors were disaggregated, sorted into single cells and profiled by smartseq2. The data can be found here (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE103322) and was gathered for the purpose of this study (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29198524). This dataset is not raw sequence data, but is already mapped with bowtie and quantified with RSEM. The data thus exists as a gene expression matrix. Each row is a gene, each column is a single cell, and each value in the matrix is a normalized “TPM” value. However, I will try to design the tool to be broadly applicable to other comparable large scRNA-seq datasets.

The tools I intend to use will be written as a python pipeline. They include H5PY, Dask, and Scikit-Allel, and possibly Biopython. H5PY is a python wrapper around HDF5 which facilitates the storage of large datasets into queryable chunks. Dask is a package which facilitates operations on multiple inputs at once, and is designed for integration with inputs from H5PY. Scikit-Allel is a package allowing exploratory analysis of large-scale genomic data. Biopython, which may or may not end up being included in the pipeline, is a wrapper around the “Entrez” Utils API. This would be used to facilitate download of data from the Gene Expression Omnibus repository.

The Novelty of this proposal comes from the fact that there are few easy-to-use and clear packages written specifically for coexpression analysis of single-cell RNA seq data. The applicability of olded packages designed for bulk RNA seq to scRNAseq datasets is unclear in terms of statistics and often difficult in terms of basic usage. Thus, I am desgining a tool to be used exclusively for scRNA-seq data.

The Goal of this project is ultimately to be able to perform coexpresion analysis on large single-cell RNAseq datasets using local processors via slicing/subsetting the matrix. In the manner described in the “tools” paragraph. Hopefully this will work!
